---
title: 'Evaluation'
date: '2024-06-17'
summary: 'Determining the strength of a position with material value, piece-square tables, and more'
---

Before we get to searching through trees of different moves, we have to be able to evaluate how good or bad a position is. Otter's evaluation approach is not overly advanced, and only really considers a few different metrics to determine the strength of a position.

# Material Value

The first and most immediate indicator of the strength of a position is the difference in material value. To do this, each `Piece` can be assigned a constant value and simply summed up to determine each color's material value.

<table className='self-center'>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th>Piece</th>
            <th>Value</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>`Pawn`</td>
            <td>100</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>`Knight`</td>
            <td>300</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>`Bishop`</td>
            <td>300</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>`Rook`</td>
            <td>500</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>`Queen`</td>
            <td>900</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>`King`</td>
            <td>0</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

These rough estimates are commonly used for determining material value, where a `Rook` is slightly worse than 2 `Bishop`/`Knight`s, and a `Queen` is slightly worse than 2 `Rook`s.

The `King` is given a value of 0 because for all valid positions, each player has a single `King` piece. Each player's additional value generated by a `King` would just cancel out.

# Piece-Square Tables

Just as important as material value is the position of the pieces. For example, the threat of a `Pawn` promoting could single-handedly turn the tables in a close game, so in that case the `Pawn` should definitely be worth much more than its base value.

A convenient way of representing the value of a position is by using a [piece-square table](https://www.chessprogramming.org/Piece-Square_Tables), which stores a position value per square on the board. Piece-square tables allow us to help push pieces in the right direction by using positive values, or prevent pieces from doing generally poor things with negative values. They follow a lot of the general rules of chess, but don't overly influence things. The depth of searching is much better for handling various intricacies of positions.

Following are heatmaps for each piece-square table used, along with any rationale for why some values were set. They were originally fetched from [this wiki post](https://www.chessprogramming.org/Simplified_Evaluation_Function#Piece-Square_Tables). Also, note that each table is relative to `White`. When used for `Black`, the table is flipped so it works identically for each color.

## Pawn

<PieceSquareTable values={[
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
50, 50, 50, 50, 50, 50, 50, 50,
10, 10, 20, 30, 30, 20, 10, 10,
5, 5, 10, 25, 25, 10, 5, 5,
0, 0, 0, 20, 20, 0, 0, 0,
5, -5, -10, 0, 0, -10, -5, 5,
5, 10, 10, -20, -20, 10, 10, 5,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
]} />

-   `Pawn`s on the center two files are encouraged to move from their starting spot and take central control of the board.
-   All pawns are encouraged to push for the promotion squares at the end of the board.

## Knight

<PieceSquareTable values={[
-50, -40, -30, -30, -30, -30, -40, -50,
-40, -20, 0, 0, 0, 0, -20, -40,
-30, 0, 10, 15, 15, 10, 0, -30,
-30, 5, 15, 20, 20, 15, 5, -30,
-30, 0, 15, 20, 20, 15, 0, -30,
-30, 5, 10, 15, 15, 10, 5, -30,
-40, -20, 0, 5, 5, 0, -20, -40,
-50, -40, -30, -30, -30, -30, -40, -50,
]} />

-   `Knight`s are best when in the center of the board where they can attack the highest number of squares.

## Bishop

<PieceSquareTable values={[
-20, -10, -10, -10, -10, -10, -10, -20,
-10, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, -10,
-10, 0, 5, 10, 10, 5, 0, -10,
-10, 5, 5, 10, 10, 5, 5, -10,
-10, 0, 10, 10, 10, 10, 0, -10,
-10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, -10,
-10, 5, 0, 0, 0, 0, 5, -10,
-20, -10, -10, -10, -10, -10, -10, -20,
]} />

-   `Bishop`s are also pushed towards the center of the board where they can also attack the highest number of squares.
-   Not as important as the knight though, so restrictions are lessened.

## Rook

<PieceSquareTable values={[
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
5, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 5,
-5, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, -5,
-5, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, -5,
-5, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, -5,
-5, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, -5,
-5, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, -5,
0, 0, 0, 5, 5, 0, 0, 0,
]} />

-   `Rook`s are encouraged to take up the 7th rank (or 2nd for `Black`), where they might be able to flank and take pawns.

## Queen

<PieceSquareTable values={[
-20, -10, -10, -5, -5, -10, -10, -20,
-10, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, -10,
-10, 0, 5, 5, 5, 5, 0, -10,
-5, 0, 5, 5, 5, 5, 0, -5,
0, 0, 5, 5, 5, 5, 0, -5,
-10, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 0, -10,
-10, 0, 5, 0, 0, 0, 0, -10,
-20, -10, -10, -5, -5, -10, -10, -20,
]} />

-   Similar to `Bishop`, in that it is generally best to keep the `Queen` central, where the bulk of evaluation would come from searching later on.

## King

<PieceSquareTable values={[
-30, -40, -40, -50, -50, -40, -40, -30,
-30, -40, -40, -50, -50, -40, -40, -30,
-30, -40, -40, -50, -50, -40, -40, -30,
-30, -40, -40, -50, -50, -40, -40, -30,
-20, -30, -30, -40, -40, -30, -30, -20,
-10, -20, -20, -20, -20, -20, -20, -10,
20, 20, 0, 0, 0, 0, 20, 20,
20, 30, 10, 0, 0, 10, 30, 20,
]} />

-   Encourage the `King` to castle and remain safe behind `Pawn`s

# Improvements

This is just about all that Otter uses for its evaluation function. There are obviously many more involved and sophisticated approaches to position evaluation that top engines employ, such as:

-   Implementing piece-square tables based on game phase.
    -   For example, a `King` in the early game would follow some different general rules than one in the late game.
-   Evaluating pawn structure
-   Considering piece mobility
-   Checking for trapped pieces
-   Evaluating `King` safety

For all of these approaches, including those that Otter implements, there are many different importances assigned to different factors. Many engines use different scales for material value or more fine-tuned piece-square tables. Tweaking some of these different values can influence the engine in its "personality" while playing, but in general, most of the heavy work is done when searching.
